---
layout: post
title: "What Is The Curve Behind An Iterative Lerp?"
description: "An investigation into lerping a value over multiple frames, and which curve it represents. The answer: an exponential!"
---

## Conclusion

While lerp is linear by definition, running it iteratively over multiple frames results in an exponential curve.

Iteratively lerping from 0 to 1 with a factor $$d$$ given a frame number[^0] $$x$$ can be expressed as:

$$ f(x) = 1 - (1-d)^x $$

[^0]: Assuming a steady frame rate, frame number is equivalent to time elapsed. Making $$d$$ a multiple of the time since the last frame also helps make it resilient to frame rate fluctuations, but does not make it completely independent from them.

Which looks like:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/tq3afseoxn" width="800" height="450" style="border: 1px solid #ccc" frameborder=0></iframe>

## Lerp

I am working on player movement in Unity ([a game engine](https://unity.com/)), and want the player's velocity to change smoothly from frame to frame[^1] - with no abrupt speed changes.

[^1]: Games work by successively rendering frames to the player's screen. After the game state is updated, a frame is rendered and displayed for a mere fraction of a second - until the next one is ready.

Naturally, I decide to use lerp to this effect:

$$ lerp(a, b, d) = a + d \cdot (b - a)  $$

This function, very commonly used in game development, moves a value $$a$$ towards a value $$b$$ by a factor $$d \in [0, 1]$$. It can be used to animate an object's position, rotation, color, and almost anything else.

Because it is so common and accessible, I want to know what the underlying curve is when it is used over multiple frames. Additionally, I worry that frame rate may have an effect on that curve, and want to prevent that from happening as it can result in different gameplay for players with varying frame rates.

## The Curve

If we run lerp each frame with constant $$a$$ and $$b$$ while increasing the factor $$d$$ as a multiple of the time elapsed[^2], the result is a simple line that reaches the target value when $$ d = 1 $$:

[^2]: Making $$d$$ a multiple of time ensures lerp does not only rely on how many frames have passed. Time elapsed and frames rendered tend to not be perfectly related due to frame rate fluctuations. Do note that this does not make lerp entirely frame rate independent.

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/3vklex2bg7" width="800" height="450" style="border: 1px solid #ccc" frameborder=0></iframe>

However, this is quite rarely done - more likely, we assign the result of lerp to $$a$$ on each frame, and set the factor $$d$$ to a multiple of the time since the last frame $$ \Delta time $$[^3], measured in seconds.

[^3]: At 60 frames per second, $$ \Delta time = \frac{1}{60} = 0.01666...$$, which is a very small value. We ignore the case where $$ d \notin [0, 1] $$, because it is rare that a frame takes long enough for it to happen and because $$d$$ can simply be clamped to that range.

To make things even simpler, we can set $$a = 0$$ and $$b = 1$$, which does not affect the underlying curve.

We can then define the iterative lerp as a series $$S$$ given a frame number $$n$$:

$$
S_{0} = 0
$$

$$
S_{n} = S_{n-1} + d \cdot (1 - S_{n-1})
$$

Each frame, we take the previous frame's result and add to it the remaining value multiplied by $$d$$.

We can simplify this expression by representing the remaining value each frame as $$ (1 - d)^{n-1} $$ instead[^4]:

[^4]: My own attempts and all external sources I could find lead me to believe this approach (framing the remaining value as an exponential) is the only way to avoid a mathematical dead end. Please do mention an alternative if you know it!

$$
S_{0} = 0
$$

$$
S_{n} = S_{n-1} + d \cdot (1 - d)^{n-1}
$$

$$ 1 - d $$ happens to be the fraction of the target value remaining after a frame passes.
Raising it to the power of $$ n-1 $$ gives us the remaining value after $$ n-1 $$ frames have passed.

For example, with $$ d = 0.1 $$, we would have $$ (1 - 0.1) = 0.9 $$ remaining on the first frame, $$ 0.9 * 0.9 $$ on the second, and so on.

We can use the same reasoning to replace the remaining recursive term:

$$
\begin{aligned}

& 1 - S_{n-1} = (1 - d)^{n-1} \\

\Leftrightarrow {}& S_{n-1} = 1 - (1 - d)^{n-1}

\end{aligned}
$$

The expression thus becomes:

$$
\begin{aligned}
S_{n} &= 1 - (1 - d)^{n-1} + d \cdot (1 - d)^{n-1} \\

&= 1 - (1 - d)^{n-1} \cdot (1 - d) \\

&= 1 - (1 - d)^{n}
\end{aligned}
$$

Now that there are no recursive terms, and since our expression matches the case $$ S_{0} = 0 $$, we can convert the series to a continuous function directly:

$$ f(x) = 1 - (1-d)^x $$

We can now see that the curve underlying an iterative lerp is an exponential! Let's see how it looks in a plot:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/tq3afseoxn" width="800" height="450" style="border: 1px solid #ccc" frameborder=0></iframe>

Feel free to see how different values for the factor $$d$$ affect the curve by dragging the slider.

Coming soon: A part 2 where we explore why lerping iteratively is not frame rate independent even if $$d$$ is a multiple of $$\Delta time$$, and how we can make it so.

---

{:footnotes}
